everyone laws the Montgomery at your
service thanks for tuning into the China
history podcast
anyway I say this a lot but this topic
today long overdue this was on the
original list of topics I wrote down off
the top of my head back in 2010 so today
I'm going to give the Gaghan on the Gil
choose of the world the same
introductory overview treatment that I
gave the Hakka people in CHP episode 150
the first time I heard that word deal
Chu te o CH e W was back in the 80s I
heard the term from someone I knew in
Singapore even with a few years of
Mandarin under my belt I never come
across that word Gil Chu it didn't take
long I think you're out that the do two
people were one in the same as the chow
chow people and do Chu to simply the
word chow chow mispronounced by me and
their deal Chu dialect don't hold me to
the correct pronunciation but they
called themselves the gaggy nine which
in Mandarin is written is it's the Jeeva
in our people I'm gonna use the three
words for do qu interchangeably
throughout this episode Mandarin Chow
Chow Cantonese Chiu Chow don't quote me
on those tones and yo Chu and the local
dialect please at least give me an A for
effort as far as my juju pronunciation
goes do Cho Cho Cho Cho Cho same Chinese
characters for all the three main things
that do to people the world over share
in common with each other or of course
this deal chu dialect spoken by about 15
million or so people worldwide there's
also this shared culture they have that
includes their famous cuisine and lastly
either they live in cho cho or they're
descended or partly descended from
people who originally came from this
region the city of child Joe gets all
the glory and top billing thanks in part
to the fame and well earned repute of
their excellent chew gel cuisine but it
would be much more accurate to call that
do
choose the chosen people Chow shun is
the term used to describe the geographic
area of Chau Chau and neighboring
Shantou Chow Chow Shantou Chow shun the
first characters of each of the two
cities actually there are three main
cities that make up this rich Chow shun
coastal area
these are Chau Chau Shonto and the city
of gia young these three places are then
further broken down into districts
pretty much every do chew on planet
Earth can trace their lineage to any one
of these eight districts from the
chaoshan region those of you
good-looking listeners of mine who read
Chinese history books will have come
across the word Swatow
more than once Swatow SW ATO W is the
same as Shantou what do jus is to ciao
Joe
that's what Swatow is to Shantou it's
just the name of the city again
mispronounced by me in the local dialect
my Mandarin is bad enough so bear with
me as I mangle all the Cantonese and do
two pronunciations just north of this
chaoshan area bordering it in fact is a
place called Mei Chao and if you
remember from that Hakka episode may Joe
was sort of like the worldwide corporate
headquarters of the Hakka people but you
see the difference between the Jaquez of
Mei Chao and the do Chu of the chaoshan
region was that the do choose came from
that specific region and their dialect
was of that region and it had
similarities with other non do to people
of that part of China the Jaquez of Majo
on the other hand didn't come from a Jo
that's just where they ended up after
several waves of migration going back to
the fourth century Jin dynasty and again
in the 12th century with the church and
Jin dynasty like the jaquez the do true
people also came from the central plains
of China where China began her nan Xiang
XI the Yellow River Valley thereabouts
Majo is far from the coast
the haka has usually lived and burned in
the mountains and valleys the Cho Shan
people on the other hand they had it
made no mountains for them they were
right on the coast where the soil was
fertile and the supply of seafood
unlimited and besides that Shonto had
evolved into a thriving trading port for
the region 3 nice-sized rivers ran right
through Chau shun the Hun funky and
Rhone rivers the roam emptied out right
into Shonto Harbor it was a very
efficiently watered world the doges and
Jaquez were both northern Han Chinese
who had bolted from their original
non-shiny homeland when things got too
precarious up there they first fled
during the wool invasions of 4th and 5th
centuries the whoo-hoo the five beards
or barbarians these warriors from the
surrounding stepped laid waste to the
Jin dynasty the Jin had come out on top
at the conclusion of the Three Kingdoms
period but their dynasty wasn't terribly
long-lasting and when they fell things
got so nasty for the northern Han
Chinese people that those who could hit
the road started heading in the opposite
direction from once these whoo-hooo came
these woeful these big five who chased
the future till Jews out of their Yellow
River Valley homeland were of course the
longtime nemesis of the Han Chinese
going back to the Han Dynasty the Xiong
nu as well as the shinbei gia young and
D people the violence that came in the
wake of these invading step people
caused a massive migration of northern
Han Chinese to the safer regions of
Jiang nan southern China south of the
Yangtze River and this wouldn't be the
last time either that northern Han
aristocrats and everyone else who had
the means to flee abandon the north and
the central plains of China for warmer
and safer climbs down in the south but
it mostly began during the early fourth
century
the time of Constantine the Great in the
West and then during the three hundred
years between the fall of the Jin and
the early Tang Dynasty in the seventh
century so many Han Chinese opted to
vacate the premises
the jaquez were one group so are the do
choose the do true people kept running
until they ended up in what is today
southern Fujian Beach and Joe Putin area
mostly it was between the Tong and un
dynasties maybe in search of greener
pastures that these do to people
originally from the China heartland now
mostly in southern most Fujian Province
began to make their way further down the
coast to what was geographically
easternmost Guangdong province and one
interesting thing about the deal true
people these people of the Chou Shan
region of Guangdong their language is
not Cantonese not even a dialect of
Cantonese at a map ciao Joe ended up in
Guangdong province but linguistically
speaking these Chao Chao or do people
have more in common with the people of
southern Fujian it's where they came
from
though not anta logically speaking in
China I know you heard this before there
are seven main dialect groups Mandarin
whoo yeah young GaN haka and mean simply
put who is everything surrounding
Shanghai yeah is Cantonese Jung is who
noddy's gun is Jiang Shi and Hakka well
they're special in mean mean stands for
Fujian in fact when you drive around
Fujian province you have the character
mean and all the license plates to
identify them as Fujian registered on a
simple level there were five main
regional dialects of Fujian province the
ones on the coast and the ones inland
and food cho where the mean River
empties out into the East China Sea you
would hear the mean dong or eastern mean
dialect there are also dialects for
northern Fujian called
mean Bay or northern mean there's no
western Maine since Western Fujian is
heavily haka based there's also a
central mean dialect and the one we're
concerned with southern mean or mean on
the dojo people as I said ended up in
the southernmost corner of Fujian
province right where it collides with
the easternmost tip of Guangdong so once
again a key point the do Jews have more
in common with Fujian and Guangdong
that's why the do Chu people speak a
dialect of the southern mean variety and
not a dialect of Cantonese there's six
tones in cha cha hwa - more than in
Mandarin and two less than in Cannes and
haze now I learned this back in the 90s
when I was in the ceramics business I
worked with this factory and child Jo
who made these traditional Chinese fish
bowls and vases that we sold the K Mart
in the u.s. even though it was only a
five hour drive by car from Guangzhou no
one at this Chow Chow Factory spoke
Cantonese Mike Hong Kong Chinese
colleagues spoke to them in Mandarin
that was my realization that the
language these Chacho people spoke had
nothing to do with Cantonese and I found
out you could set off from downtown
ciaochao drive to the border of Fujian
province in less than an hour with no
traffic that is some of you are
wondering then if that's the ojou then
what's this
Hokkien dialect do Chu and Hokkien
what's up with that well they're not the
same but both being mean and or southern
mean dialects they're pretty close you
could think of Hokkien is the language
of Taiwan and the three main cities of
southern Fujian shaman Changjo and jeong
cho jeong cho is the last major city in
southern Fujian if you keep driving
you'll be at the border with Cho Cho in
two hours how can by the way is just the
name for Fujian and that mean on dialect
hoc is foo kin is Jen in fact the
Cantonese refer to these guys as huck lo
Fujian guys or Fujian folks huh Chlo
they're just people from Fujian the
Cantonese say Huck Lo and Mandarin it's
either fool
or the law in the proper way of course
is simply Fujian Wren worldwide there
are roughly 25 million or so deal Chu
people
hey man that's the population of
Australia about half live in the
chow-chow Shantou ga-young area and the
rest are spread out all over the world
but mostly in the Greater China region
the highest concentration of do to
people outside China are in Thailand
believe it or not Thailand is home to
the largest overseas Chinese community
in the world not a very well-known fact
9 million that's more than double the
number of Chinese Americans and of all
the ethnic Chinese in the Land of Smiles
56 percent are Teochew the balance 44
percent are made up of the usual
suspects
Hokkien Hakka Hainanese and Cantonese in
Singapore the Hopkins slightly outnumber
the deal choose to take the top spot
there a lot of do choose ended up in
Vietnam no surprise there Cantonese and
Hokkien are there too of course and a
whole bunch of these Vietnamese do Chu
walk you in the 1970s emigrated to
Europe
Australia Canada and here to the good
old USA just in la alone there are quite
a few dojo who lived in Vietnam for
generations before coming to the u.s.
well besides Vietnam suffice to say do
Chu communities are all over Southeast
Asia Malaysia Indonesia Cambodia
Philippines all over not every deal chew
on the planet speaks the dialect there's
maybe 10 million speakers inside the
chaoshan region and perhaps another 3
million or so outside i'm guessing less
and less of the younger generation are
learning the dialect and the attrition
rates has got to be pretty bad in the
21st century
one other thing like the jaquez who did
not go in for the whole foot binding
thing the do choose did partake of that
custom the two peoples were very similar
in
anyways but they parted ways on that
score the Jaquez were among the great
farmers of China that made no sense to
diminish their labor force by binding
the feet of their women folk in the
towns and villages were Hakka Gil Chu
borders meet in Chow Chow and Chia Yong
it was common for the folk out there to
be familiar with each other's dialect
even though the two had nothing in
common linguistically the history of
this coastal region of Fujian and
Guangdong predates the arrival of the do
choose as far as I can tell the child
Shan region got written into the history
books during the time of the first
emperor Qin Shi Huang perhaps you recall
the CHP episodes on the history of Hong
Kong part 1 and the rise and fall of the
Qin part 2 I mentioned this before way
down in the south was the nun high
commander II commanderies
or Jun went back to the Cho dynasty
these were thoughts that kept an eye on
all the frontier lands in between the
counties when the Qin Emperor unified
the country he divided everything up
initially into 36 commanderies this Chao
Shan region not called that yet by the
way was a small unimportant part of the
nan hai commander II nan hai Southsea
those two characters for 2,000 years
will come to define that whole region
down there and the one in charge of the
nan hai commander II was a major guy in
Guangdong history child hua you perhaps
recall he was the one who rose up
against the Qin government after Qin
Shihuang died and everything for his
dynasty began to unravel ja wohl went on
to form the nine-year Kingdom so I'll
discussed before the Nonya of course
will be relegated to the dustbin of
Chinese history once the han emperor wu
arrives on the scene about century after
the demise of the Qin Emperor during the
time in between the eastern Han and
unification under the sway the people
living down there who were not calling
themselves the do to people
got shifted around from one jurisdiction
to another until the Year 590 when under
the founding Emperor when of sway Chow
Prefecture was set up back then these
Prefecture 's were called a Jo so child
Prefecture ciao Joe Chu Jo do Jiu that's
where that all comes from throughout
most of Chinese imperial history the
place was referred to as the hye-young
district after the fall of the ching the
ROC government renamed it Chau Anne
County
so this homeland of the do to people the
Chau shunran has been on the map for
more than 2200 years like almost every
place in China what they used to call it
a thousand years ago of what they call
it today has some variants but it's only
been called child Jo for maybe 1700 of
those years and that's based on recorded
history but archaeologists have dug
plenty of neolithic tools and implements
out of the ground that proves human
beings populated that region for
something like 8,000 years you know to
be perfectly honest the couch on region
in the context of Chinese history it
isn't really a famous or important place
chouchou is not a Beijing or a Shanghai
or a Wuhan Kai Tong Guangzhou or
Hangzhou places that are coated thick
with all kinds of Chinese history
Chau Joe's claim to fame ended up being
the achievements of its native sons and
daughters who left the homeland and went
on to globalize the chocho people by
fanning out across the world they also
spread awareness about the culture and
the whole big shiny Gil Chu brand I'll
circle back later and we'll look at some
of the wen hua the culture that Chau Joe
is famous for I already mentioned
ceramics they're famous for a whole lot
more during the Ching dynasty when times
got tough beginning around the second
half of the Qianlong Emperor's overly
long reign the do to people were right
the front of the line with millions of
other Chinese mostly men at the
beginning who participated in this great
19th century diaspora most all of these
Chinese came from a belt way they had
stretched from Hainan Island in the West
to all points surrounding the Pearl
River Delta eastward up the coast of
Guangdong and into Fujian province the
deal Jews were part of that whole
migration of Chinese who reluctantly
left their homeland in the 1800s to try
their luck elsewhere on six continents
and just like the jaquez the Hokkien
cantonese and all these other coastal
dwellers the men from Chao Chao Chantal
and Chia Yan these Chao hundred they too
went out and built beach heads and all
the up-and-coming commercial centers in
Asia and the west and it didn't take
long for the do choose to establish a
reputation for being unusually shrewd at
business
besides famine war natural disasters and
political instability there were two
main reasons for leaving the comforts of
home one was related to kinship and the
other was contractual in the former it
was the old case of one brave soul
blazed the trail first got set up in a
new land and then called for more family
members to help him in his enterprise
and he served as the anchor to offer
stability and support for those of his
kin who followed in these so called
credit ticket migrations this involved
migrants who were recruited in their
hometowns to work wherever there was a
labor shortage and these kind of
migrants didn't have any kin where they
were going
these folk which of course included many
deal Jews signed contracts and then went
off to toil in any number of lines of
work that mostly involved heavy lifting
or a lot of bending and squatting during
the 1850s to the 1870s this was
especially true trade was booming in
China towns were popping up in more
places than just
destacia the Taiping rebellion and the
general degradation of late Qing society
offered plenty of impetus for do Jews
and others to consider these overseas
options in the 1850s and 60s that do
Jews joined their Cantonese cousins in
the gold mines and and laying down
railroad tracks in the United States one
good example of an early do Chu who made
good would be shallow Jean I'm not sure
I could pronounce his name the same way
they do it in Singapore but he was known
in the local dialect as CI Eugene his
surname sure is the one that Mandarin
rhymes with snake and I always get it
mixed up with the character for the
surname you the show surname is one of
the more special ones in the world of do
choose those from this clan traced their
arrival in cho cho to an ancient
descendant that went all the way back to
the leo song dynasty 422 479 that was
the first of the northern and southern
dynasties the nan beige how the leo song
was one of the southern ones so sure Yeo
Jin's clan had this nice pedigree
in every overseas Chinese community in
every city in town there were always
those like show yo Jin who got there
first took their lumps with the locals
learn the language established a
foothold and then thrived and from these
early pioneers rose leaders for each and
every sub community show yo Jin after
building his fortune in the 1830s became
the community leader for the do Jews in
Singapore when the Sultan of johar
signed the treaty with Sir Stamford
Raffles in February of 1819 that got the
whole Singapore thing up and running
there were less than 500 dill chew at
the time giulio gene arrived in
Singapore in 1823 right at the beginning
nothing like getting in at the ground
floor after trying his hand at trading
he went into the Gambier business
hey I didn't know what that was either
Gambier is a plant extract that was
mostly used as a brown colored tanning
agent of the leather industry it was
also a Chinese medicine it was a big
business in the mid 19th century and the
Saudi Arabia of Gambier was Malaysia and
Indonesia as well now he got into the
business during the boom years they
lasted a long time and it seeded a great
fortune and show yo Jin and his
descendents lived in this magnificent
house of Singapore and a lot of do
choose got into this gam beer industry
two decades after show yo gene arrived
in Singapore that Joe Chiu community had
grown to almost 20,000 by the time of
the 1881 census they were twenty two
thousand six hundred and forty four
which thanks to the wave of Hokkien
migration from malacca put the do choose
in second place behind a Hokkien
population do Chu and Huck yen together
comprised about half the total Singapore
Chinese population the word must have
got out about the rich pickings to be
had in the Lion City because Hokkien
people came in waves during the 1820s
from all over Southeast Asia and
southern Fujian the Jaquez and gill Jews
always use Shonto as their launching
point for Southeast Asia the Hokkien
people mostly sailed out of Xiamen which
back in the day was known as a Moy
that's how you say shaman in the local
lingo boy was also one of the new treaty
ports that got pried open in the 1840s
show you a gene together with other deal
choose from various clans formed what
became known as the neon gone Zoo or in
mandarin the yeon goose' and this
association became the earliest
collective voice of the do Chu community
in Singapore their mission was to be the
go-to local organization for anything
related to do Chu rites customs
religious beliefs and like any other
Chinese Benevolent Association they had
to look after
all do choose in need and act as a
support group it was even left to them
to play a hand in promoting education
within the community of do choose in
Singapore they're still around today
though their influence over the
community became quite diminished around
the 1930s the Singapore 8 districts
Association is the big one today the
Chao Chao by Equis Guan 8 districts
again because all do choo-choo
cha-cha-cha people come from one of the
eight districts of the Chao Shan region
show Eugene like other prominent and
successful Chinese often acted as a
go-between whenever the British had to
interface with the Chinese community and
some important issue for example in 1854
when the the choose and Hokkien of
Singapore were killing each other over
an economic dispute sure yo Jim was
called in by the British to make a deal
with Hokkien leaders to end the
bloodletting so he was a major guy in
early Singaporean history and typical in
some ways of the hometown boy who leaves
Chao Chao creates a fortune in business
overseas and gives back to the place
from which he came and brings glory to
his people sure yo gene was one of the
early do Chu greats
his grave was later lost to history but
was recently rediscovered in November
2012 on grave hill near the Caldecott
subway station there were other early
child is of Singapore history show yo
gene was just one of them
ciao Joe was one of the later treaty
ports opened in 1858 actually whenever
you've referred to the port
geographically speak and you're talking
about Shantou Shantou had the best
location as a port for trade went this
was how goods and people got in and out
of each house on region until railroads
and air travel started to happen like
others who made their home along the
South China coast they knew how to eat
well Guangdong was always a rich
province the same can be said of food
Qin Shi
Kjell cuisine is one of the greats of
chinese regional cuisines Chow Shan's hi
it's not Fujian ease nor Cantonese but
the Chow Joanie's drew inspiration from
both of those styles of cooking seafood
and vegetables are what they're most
famous for some complain that Chiu Chow
food is slightly bland but with Chiu
Chow food there's no need to bury the
natural flavor with peppers spices
pungent sauces and fragrances to me the
essence of preparing Chow Chow food
involves steaming lightly flavoring and
as fresh as possible my very first boss
after I moved out to Hong Kong 1989 was
mr. Frank yeah he and his family his
wife they were all Chow Chow people so
this was the very first culture I got to
see and take part in once I moved out
there all company functions weddings
Spring Festival banquets were always
held at one of a couple Chiu Chow
restaurants in Hong Kong and whenever we
wined and dined out-of-towners you can
bet it was always at one of the best
possible Chiu Chow of seafood palaces in
Hong Kong
notable dishes are Roku cha a kind of
meat soup I don't think I ever had to
that tasted the same Chow Chow braised
goose is another mainstay there's also a
goose dish called Liu Shui that always
seems to be on the table for starters
Chiu Chow food is flooded with so many
crab and fish dishes a true signature
dish is a kind of dumbshit a crab in the
shell of course that's eaten cold
oysters are also a major ingredients if
you don't like seafood
shell cuisine is perhaps not for you
being on the coast and all and the South
China Sea being a haven for sharks shark
fin soup was also a big cheap child food
item you know share prices and shark fin
soup have tanked over the years thanks
to yo Ming and WildAid who spoke out
about the
realities of the shark fin harvesting
process sales are down more than 50% but
what it was still okay to order it these
chefs of qjo took the art of preparing
and serving shark's fins to great
heights there's always these great
sauces that pair with various chill
child foods and this cuisine is one of
the only Chinese cuisines I ever
experienced that also uses fish sauce
ulul in mandarin no mom in Vietnamese
it's a very particular Southeast Asian
kind of flavor if you ask for it in a
chew gel place they'll have it Chow
Chows entry to the honor roll of great
Chinese sauces is called cha-cha sauce
it's real thick made from soybean oil
shallots dried fish dried shrimp and a
nice kick of chili and garlic ChaCha
this is the same as satay sauce that
maybe some of you might know of satay
and you can get instant noodles with
this cha-cha flavor and it's another
great taste of ciaochao ciaochao
ciaochao is the best known noodle dish
that's as common and traditional as it
comes in Vietnam they call it whoo -
it's a kind of rice or egg noodle soup
filled with all kinds of choices of
meats seafood and other ingredients
beloved by so many it's not a
one-size-fits-all dish and there's all
kinds of variations and different people
take it different ways but that's a big
one any respectable chow chow dive will
have that on the menu
every major regional cuisine in China
has their own spin on soups Kahn G's
fish cakes rice flour cakes egg dishes
braised dishes hot pots desserts noodles
and dumplings Chow Chow food has their
own version of all that - I'm not gonna
say it's my favorite but for most of my
Chinese friends even those not of the
deal Chu persuasion they say this style
of eating is always high on their list
and it's considered fine-dining a dinner
out for four and a
nice sparkly Chucho joint with all the
trimmings is not a cheap date the
steamed fish alone can set you back
fifty or honored bucks if you have
access to chew Chow food where you live
and never tried it before go check it
out if you want to learn how to cook
Chow Chow hi there are many do chew
cookbooks available and videos galore on
YouTube and other video streaming
platforms the glittery Chow Chow seafood
emporiums are great and so are the small
dives found in China towns the world
over and fortunately for yours truly
they're all over the San Gabriel Valley
Little Saigon and LA Chinatown there are
always one or two Chow Chow owned shops
that carries all the greatest hits of
Chow Chow style breakfasts and lunches
to me in my worthless opinion the best
part about going out for chow chow food
is the gongfu cha that tradition is pure
to joe no matter if you're at some chew
Chow restaurant or at someone's home out
will come a plate of kungfu tea when you
arrive and before you leave if you
recall from that ten part history of tea
series from days gone by gongfu cha was
a tea prepared in a very precise
deliberate and careful manner that's why
it's called gongfu cha going fool means
effort to try hard you had to use a
little effort to make this kind of tea
there's a whole process it's not like
taking a tea bag and letting it steep at
a tea pot for a few minutes so when you
serve someone this tea this kung fu cha
no matter at a restaurant or at some
kind of social gathering when you drink
it you could pause and reflect on the
time and effort it took for your hosts
to prepare this kind of tea for you it
implies humility respect and welcoming
generosity in the dojo Cho Cho style as
soon as you sit down at your seat
someone will come out and welcome you
with a plate of small tea cups each
filled with a strong tieguanyin tea a
type of long you take it all in one
zip that's all you can get in one cup
but it's rich and certainly welcoming
the same ritual is repeated at the end
of the meal as well you get your dough
juice end off also with your tiny cup of
gongfu tea it's a great little custom
and I'm a sucker for drinking tea from
tiny delicate porcelain cups the other
tea that is particularly associated
which how Shawn is called dongseong cha
if you could get your hands on authentic
dongseong tea you're lucky it's another
kind of along with a distinctive flavor
of that region what else
defines the au jus culture besides their
language their distinctive cuisine and
beautiful tea culture just like with
their own style of Chinese food that
takes regular dishes and turns them
uniquely into a chocho style the same
can be said of their opera dance music
embroidery wood carving and as I said
before the ceramic arts every pocket of
China has their own take on all these
signature arts of Chinese culture Chow
Chow Opera Chow Jude I'm not sure how
much the younger generation embraces
this but it's been popular for a
thousand years
it borrows heavily from Song Dynasty
nanshy or southern drama as well as
couldn't you are couldn't opera couldn't
you was popular in the Ming and Qing and
many of the older generation the more
traditional ones at least still love it
Chinese opera Peking Sichuan Cantonese
Chiu Chow it's a whole world there's so
much to it I also must admit although I
love watching it I can't say I'm
familiar with what's going on that you
Joe people came up with their own
version and although it isn't as popular
and recognizable is there great food and
tea culture it's something about cha cha
culture that they call their own the top
Chiu Chow surnames thanh and Lim are the
big two that's Chun and Lin and Mandarin
mmm go and take off the top five those
are better known in Mandarin has Wong Wu
and Jung number six is Lee and speaking
of Lee perhaps the most famous child
role Ren of them all has that surname
and I featured this person in an episode
from way back in 2010 episode CHP 13
that you Cho people have worldwide
bragging rights to one of the richest
tycoons in Asia sir lee kai-shing worth
more than thirty billion dollars for as
long as I could remember he was always
the number one or two richest person in
Asia but now with billionaires being a
dime a dozen in China sir KS Lee has
dropped to second place behind China's
Wong jinlun who currently wears the
championship belt for richest man in
Asia but one does mr. Wang isn't from
child Joe knees from Guangzhou and in su
chuan the birthplace of woods attend
trivia for you
li kai-shing however he came from Chow
Chow when times got tough he left Chao
Chao and came to Hong Kong in the 1940s
just like say Eugene who got into the
Gambier business and Singapore just as
the industry was taking off li kai-shing
got into the plastics business right at
the beginning and built a fortune that
today is worth about 80 billion dollars
his wealth has mostly derived from his
significant stake in these companies
Cheung Kong and Hutchison Whampoa his li
kai-shing foundation is a major player
in the world of philanthropy in his
hometown has been one of the prime
beneficiaries of his generosity sir KS
Li is an extreme case of someone who
left his hometown and never forgot where
he came from the success that sir li
kai-shing achieved allowed him to donate
money to build Shantou university the
Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business
and he's given to universities and
institutions the world over so li
kai-shing now push a 90 years old is
always pointed to
the ultimate model son of ciaochao who
like others before him brought glory and
pride to his hometown by leaving it D is
not the only do Chu who made good Hong
Kong's other famous Cho Cho Yin are
Joseph love Chinese estates Holdings
limp or yen lean by sheen of the lie son
group Albert Yong Yong Cho Chang of the
Emperor group and Vincent load walk
angry of sino land and of course my old
boss mr. Frank yeah those are just the
best known there are of course many
others and all have helped to stoke the
reputation Cho Cho people have earned
he has industrious hardworking and very
strong in business in the rice business
especially in Thailand ethnic Cho Cho
people dominate and have dominated for
as long as anyone could remember the CP
group yeah that guy to Thailand's
richest man Don injera but none a ka
shaquan mean he came from Cho Cho people
to who left China in the 1920s as soon
as they arrived in Bangkok they went
straight into the agribusiness industry
and never liked it the man who brought
us QQ and weixin WeChat Ponemah Maha
Tong he too was a card-carrying member
of the child show people I mentioned how
there are a lot of Vietnamese walk you
who also called Cho Cho their ancestral
home this includes mr. David Tran he is
a Vietnamese Chu Joe came here to the
beautiful country in 1978 he started a
company here in LA called way funky
famous Sri Racha chilli sauce
beloved by Vietnamese and millions of
others the world over and lately
imitated by fortune 500 companies and
small batch Sri Racha makers the world
over mr. David Tran Vietnamese Chu Joe
my hero Tran is the Vietnamese version
of Chun or tan in the Chucho dialect so
that's the skinny on the Teochew people
aka that you Joe
aka the ciaochao people aka the gang or
the jiren everything's Chacho this and
Chacho that but one of the takeaways I
hope you got is that do Jews come from
chow-chow Shonto and jinyang and
collectively those three cities make up
what's known as the chao Shan region
don't ask me how the city of Jian got
left out of cha-cha or white cha-cha
city ended up being the one with Top
Billing the other takeaways I hope you
got from this episode their dialect is
not of the uf variety that makes up most
of Guangdong province linguistically
they're closer to the southern Fukienese
they're famous for their food and their
business tycoons their music especially
their child you or Chow Chow opera is
also considered to be quite special I
wish I could tell you more about it
all-in-all as far as a total package
goes cho cho culture is highly ranked in
the pecking order and it's of course a
major contributor of the overall and
highly enriched Ling nan culture of
Guangdong province historically they
perhaps haven't had many heroes or
important figures who topped the charts
like other parts of China had they were
great for what they did when hard times
and chaos forced them to consider
pulling up stakes and heading overseas
wherever they went they became what
later immigrants aspired to be and not
every child Joanie's who left chaoshan
became a li kai-shing or a joseph Lau
but all over the world there are
boundless
do true success stories in business the
sciences politics academia all over the
world so that's gonna be it for this
time just a little overview of chow chow
the people and the culture I hope my do
chew listeners and greater China and
Southeast Asia aren't too disappointed
by my soul makan ha intro to their
history okay until the next time this is
Laszlo Montgomery once again
signing off from the fabulous city of
Los Angeles California founded 1781
ching dynasty late chin long era
consider joining me next time for
another satisfying and easy to digest
episode of the china history podcast a
proud member of the recorded history
podcast network at recorded history
dotnet
you